Return of the bogeyman, inflation
The pandemic has challenged the conventional wisdom about how to best manage economies. Central bankers now face a dilemma: to clamp down on inflation or stimulate growth?

Some years ago, the word ‘deflation’, then unfamiliar, began to appear in public debate. It referred to a phenomenon that seemed to alarm American and European economists — a simultaneous fall in prices and incomes, combined with reduced investment and economic activity. Following the 2007-08 financial crisis, it threatened to plunge the EU and US economies into a downward spiral. It had to be stopped at all costs, even if that meant doing what the US Federal Reserve (Fed) and the European Central Bank (ECB), a temple of monetary rigour, had always tried to avoid: pouring money into the world economy in the hope of setting prices back on an upward path.

Today, the opposite problem worries economists: an explosion in prices they consider just as dangerous as deflation. In the last few months of 2021, the media were focused on the dangers of a new spell of rapid inflation. Price indexes were rising at unprecedented rates in most countries. In the US, inflation hit 7% in December 2021, a level not seen since 1982. In the eurozone it reached 5%, its highest level for 30 years in Germany and Spain. Why this sudden change? Had the world escaped the frying pan of deflation only to fall into the fire of inflation?

Inflation measures the overall change in prices in a given currency, in a given territory and over a given period (usually the last 12 months). National statistical institutes use a consumer price index (CPI), which tracks the change in price of a shopping basket of representative goods and services (700 items in the case of Eurostat), such as bread, clothing, household appliances and haircuts. Besides tracking prices, the aim is to monitor a currency’s purchasing power: when prices rise, the same amount of money buys less.

The impact of reduced purchasing power is not evenly distributed across society. Inflation can benefit debtor nations because it diminishes the burden of public debt. And when incomes keep up with prices — because of either wage bargaining or index-linking — inflation also benefits households carrying debt; index-linking in various forms helped protect French workers from the effects of inflation in the 1970s.

However, when income growth doesn’t offset a fall in purchasing power, and energy, transport and food prices rise, inflation becomes what François Mitterrand (who was responsible for the disindexation of wages in 1982) called ‘a tax on the poor’. Inflation therefore has the effect of redistributing wealth, but the way it does so depends on institutional arrangements and the balance of power in society. There is one constant: creditors and rentiers always hate inflation because it erodes the value of their savings.
The era of stagflation

Inflation was one of the US’s foremost economic concerns in the 1970s and 80s. Prices rose rapidly — at double-digit rates in 1974 and 1979-81 — against a backdrop of economic stagnation and high unemployment. Neoliberal economists, who had been honing their arguments since the end of the second world war, took advantage of this ‘stagflation’ crisis (stagnation + inflation) to impose their vision. Until then, the US’s (Keynesian) economic policy had essentially aimed to maximise economic activity, even if that caused a degree of inflation. The neoliberals, led by Milton Friedman, made combating inflation their number one priority, even if it meant driving the economy into recession.

The adoption of the new doctrine was signalled by Fed chairman Paul Volcker’s decision to raise the policy rate (the rate at which commercial banks can borrow from their central bank) drastically in 1979. The aim was to halt inflation by strangling the economy. Following this shock therapy, the CPI’s annual average fell — from 13.6% in 1980 to 3.2% in 1983 — and conditions such as a drop in the price of oil further promoted disinflation (a decrease in the pace of inflation). The neoliberals were vindicated: their monetarist remedy had proved its efficacy —too bad that it had also resulted in a string of business failures, soaring unemployment and a severe recession.

Similar concerns lay behind the rules adopted under the 1992 Maastricht Treaty in Europe: a ban on the monetisation of public deficits, and an independent central bank. The idea was to prohibit policies deemed inflationary and set explicit rules for monetary management, such as aiming to keep inflation around or below a low target rate. The ECB’s primary objective was price stability. Thus, public policy was written into the EU’s constitution in a way that conformed to the principles of ordoliberalism in all respects (1).

The new monetary doctrine called for governments to keep a close watch on inflation. In practice, this meant restrictive policies that raised interest rates with the aim of curbing borrowing and economic activity when the economy was growing too fast — that is, when unemployment was below the rate monetarists call ‘natural’. (Friedman talked of a ‘non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment’.) Simply put, public, monetary and budgetary policy was to be subordinated to the interests of rentiers and creditors.

But the 2007-08 crisis changed things: apart from fears of global financial collapse, it revived memories of the deflationary spiral and economic depression that had hit the US after the 1929 Wall Street Crash. Japan had experienced deflation during the ‘lost decade’ of the 1990s, and the Bank of Japan had not only reduced its policy rate to zero but adopted other ‘non-conventional’ policies that included buying bonds directly. The ECB and Fed used similar tools after the 2007-08 crisis and kept the financial system afloat, though without managing to extricate the European and US economies from ‘lowflation’, a mixture of weak inflation and sluggish growth.
Effect of the pandemic

The Covid-19 pandemic strained the conventional monetary wisdom even more. Saving the global economy after a large part of the world’s population had been in lockdown required massive spending and greater use of accommodative monetary policies. In the US, economic stimulus packages brought in by Donald Trump and Joe Biden, and unprecedented lending and bond buying by the Fed, reached a total value of several trillion dollars (2). The ECB launched an extensive bond-buying programme to keep European economies liquid. Despite these efforts, inflation in the US was still only around 1.4% at the end of 2020, having been as low as 0.1% that spring; meanwhile the eurozone economies, especially Germany, had slipped into deflation in August. Analysts on both sides of the Atlantic worried that their fears of deflation over the last few years were about to be realised.

In 2021 everything changed. In March, inflation started to rise again, but now it was moving too quickly. In November, former US treasury secretary Lawrence Summers wrote that, rather than marking the end of deflation, rising prices were a sign of economic overheating, which could ‘metastasize and threaten prosperity and public trust unless clearly acknowledged and addressed’ (3). Former International Monetary Fund (IMF) chief economist Olivier Blanchard tweeted that Joe Biden’s March 2021 stimulus package ‘would not be overheating [the economy]; it would be starting a fire’ (6 February 2021). German tabloid Bild criticised the ECB’s inaction in the face of rising prices, and dubbed its president, Christine Lagarde, ‘Madam Inflation’.

Summers, drawing on Friedman’s analysis, argued that inflation was a result of ‘far too much fiscal stimulus and overly easy monetary policy’: excessive budgetary spending funded by money creation would artificially stimulate the economy and create what Nouriel Roubini, a member of the Council of Economic Advisers during the Clinton administration, called ‘a medium-term stagflationary environment worse than the 1970s’ (4)

In March 2021 inflation started to rise, but too quickly. In November, Lawrence Summers wrote that rising prices were a sign of economic overheating, which could ‘metastasize and threaten prosperity and public trust unless clearly acknowledged and addressed’ ]].

The ECB and the Fed played down the risks. Fed chairman Jerome Powell called the rise in inflation ‘transitory’; ECB executive board member Isabel Schnabel said there was ‘no evidence to suggest that inflation is spiralling out of control’ (5). Many analysts took the view that its resurgence was a product of exceptional circumstances, mostly linked to the pandemic.

First, a statistical base effect. In spring 2020 the prices of some primary goods, such as oil, crashed after the introduction of pandemic countermeasures. Inflation is usually calculated over 12 months, and from April 2021 the rate began to take account of the months during which prices had been ‘abnormally’ low in the US and the eurozone. This comparison point automatically produced an ‘abnormally’ high rate.
